---
title: Introduction
date: 2014-07-16
published: true
author: dlehman
---

In this first post I want to give a quick introduction to Blivet. I will try to
avoid going into too much detail.

Blivet is a python module for configuring storage on Linux. It is also the
storage backend for [Anaconda](https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Anaconda) --
the [Fedora](http://fedoraproject.org) OS installer. That's where
Blivet came from, so anything you've done with storage while installing
Fedora (since Fedora 11) is something Blivet can do.

It can create and manage LVM (including snapshots and thin provisioning), MD,
LUKS, BTRFS (including subvolumes, snapshots, and RAID), and a whole slew of
other storage technologies.

Blivet uses a model in which changes (like creating a new device) are
represented by actions. Once an action has been registered, Blivet's device
tree will reflect the change as if it were already done. That allows you to
stack changes -- for example, remove existing partitions from a disk, then
reinitialize the disk, then create a complex device stack on that disk -- all
without writing any changes to the disk. You can also cancel actions at any
time before they are executed if you change your mind about what you want to
do. Once you are satisfied with the overall layout you can write the changes to
disk by telling Blivet to execute the actions.

Blivet has powerful disk partitioning capabilities. New partitions can have a
fixed size or a (potentially unbounded) size range. A new partition can be
constrained to a single disk or a set of possible disks. All new partitions are
aligned according to the information exported by the kernel. They can also be
specified in terms of start and end sectors on a specific disk, but that
disables automatic alignment and requires that you specify a single disk.

Another noteworthy feature is the device factory class hierarchy. These classes
can create complex device stacks with a single method call, based on a top-down
specification. You can go from an empty disk to an encrypted LVM setup using
thin provisioning with two method calls: one to initialize the disk and one to
create the full device stack on it.

This is only intended as an introduction. Future posts will go into greater
detail about specific areas of functionality.
